# RCM Numberer

This command is used to construct a reverse Cuthill-McKee (RCM)
degree-of-freedom numbering algorithm to provide the mapping between the
degrees-of-freedom at the nodes and the equation numbers. An RCM numberer uses
the reverse Cuthill-McKee scheme to order the matrix equations. 

The command to construct an RCM numberer is a follows:

```tcl
numberer RCM
```

## C++ Implementation

```cpp
#include <graph/numberer/RCM.h>

class RCM: public GraphNumberer;
```

`RCM` is a subclass of GraphNumberer which performs the numbering using
the reverse Cuthill-McKee numbering algorithm.

### Constructor

The integer `classTag` is passed to the MovableObject classes
constructor. The flag `GPS` is used to mark whether the
Gibbs-Poole-Stodlmyer algorithm is used to determine a starting vertex
when no starting vertex is given.

\
Invokes the destructor on any ID object created when `number()` is
invoked.


### Public Methods

If the present ID used for the result is not of size equal to the number
of Vertices in `theGraph`, it deletes the old and constructs a new ID.
Starts by iterating through the Vertices of the graph setting the `tmp`
variable of each to $-1$. The Vertices are then numbered using a depth
first sort of the Graph, with each unmarked `Vertex` in the Graph at a
distance $d$ from starting `Vertex` being placed in the d'th level set. As
this is RCM, the Vertices in level set $n$ are assigned a higher number
than those in level set $n+1$ with the `tmp` variable of the starting
Vertex being assigned `numVertices` $-1$. The `tags` of the Vertices are
placed into the ID at location given by their `tmp` variable. These are
replaced with the `ref` variable of each Vertex, which is returned on
successful completion.

The `Vertex` chosen as the starting `Vertex` is the one whose tag is given
by `lastVertex`. If this is $-1$ or the `Vertex` corresponding to
`lastVertex` does not exist then another `Vertex` is chosen. If the `GPS`
flag in constructor is `false` the first `Vertex` from the Graphs
VertexIter is used; if `true` a RCM numbering using the first Vertex
from the VertexIter is performed and the Vertices in the last level set
are then used to create an ID `lastVertices` with which
`number(theGraph, lastVertices)` can be invoked to determine the
numbering.

This method is invoked to determine the best starting `Vertex` for a RCM
using a `Vertex` whose tag is in `lastVertices`. To do a RCM numbering is
performed using each of the Vertices in `startVertices` as the `Vertex` in
level set $0$. The `Vertex` which results in the numbering with the
smallest profile is chosen as the starting Vertex. The RCM algorithm
outlined above is then called with this starting Vertex.

```{.cpp}
int sendSelf(Channel &theChannel, FEM_ObjectBroker &theBroker);
```
Returns $0$.

```cpp
int recvSelf(Channel &theChannel, FEM_ObjectBroker &theBroker);
```
Returns $0$.

## References

- E. Cuthill and J. McKee. <em>Reducing the bandwidth of sparse symmetric matrices</em> In Proc. 24th Nat.
  Conf., pages 157-172, 1969. <a href="http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=805928">http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=805928</a>

----------------------------------------------------------------------

<p>Code Developed by: <span style="color:blue"> fmk</span></p>

